Aob 303 - documentation about sso and local development (#1094)
akeneo/pim-docs: use_sso_authentication/index.rst

Use SSO authentication locally
==============================

This chapter describes how to enable the SSO authentication for development purpose.

How SSO works ?
---------------

> | SSO means `Single Sign-On`, their is different implementation/protocols in order to implement a SSO authentication mecanism.

Reviewer: their is --> there are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| SSO means `Single Sign-On`, their are different implementation/protocols in order to implement a SSO authentication mecanism.
```

Reviewer 3: @bgouraud `implementation/protocols` --> `implementations/protocols`

> | SSO means `Single Sign-On`, their is different implementation/protocols in order to implement a SSO authentication mecanism.

Reviewer 4: "several SSO protocols exist" ?

> | We implemented the ``SAMLv2`` protocol as it becomes a standard in the industry.

Reviewer 4: "it is a popular standard" ?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| We implemented the ``SAMLv2`` protocol as it is a popular standard in the industry.
```

|

    Security Assertion Markup Language 2.0 (SAML 2.0) is a version of the SAML standard for exchanging authentication and authorization data between security domains.

>     SAML 2.0 is an XML-based protocol that uses security tokens containing assertions to pass information about a principal (usually an end user) between a SAML authority, named an ``Identity Provider``, and a SAML consumer, named a ``Service Provider``.

Reviewer 4: an SAML

    -- Source `Wikipedia <https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SAML_2.0>`_

> The ``Identity Provider`` offer user authentication as a service, and the ``Service Provider`` could be considered as a client that will ask if a user is authenticated.

Reviewer: offer --> offers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``Identity Provider`` offers user authentication as a service, and the ``Service Provider`` could be considered as a client that will ask if a user is authenticated.
```

> The ``Identity Provider`` offer user authentication as a service, and the ``Service Provider`` could be considered as a client that will ask if a user is authenticated.

Reviewer 4: offers

> The ``Identity Provider`` offer user authentication as a service, and the ``Service Provider`` could be considered as a client that will ask if a user is authenticated.

Reviewer 4: "will ask to authenticate a user" seems more accurate to me.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The ``Identity Provider`` offer user authentication as a service, and the ``Service Provider`` could be considered as a client that will ask to authenticate a user.
```

> The content exchanged between the IdP, and the SP must be sign, that why we have to configure thoses entity with ``Certificates`` and ``Private keys``.

Reviewer: must be sign --> must be signed

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The content exchanged between the IdP, and the SP must be signed, that why we have to configure thoses entity with ``Certificates`` and ``Private keys``.
```

> The content exchanged between the IdP, and the SP must be sign, that why we have to configure thoses entity with ``Certificates`` and ``Private keys``.

Reviewer: that why --> that's why

> The content exchanged between the IdP, and the SP must be sign, that why we have to configure thoses entity with ``Certificates`` and ``Private keys``.

Reviewer: thoses entity --> those entities

> The content exchanged between the IdP, and the SP must be sign, that why we have to configure thoses entity with ``Certificates`` and ``Private keys``.

Reviewer 4: the first coma is useless

> The content exchanged between the IdP, and the SP must be sign, that why we have to configure thoses entity with ``Certificates`` and ``Private keys``.

Reviewer 4: must be signed

> The content exchanged between the IdP, and the SP must be sign, that why we have to configure thoses entity with ``Certificates`` and ``Private keys``.

Reviewer 4: that's why

> The content exchanged between the IdP, and the SP must be sign, that why we have to configure thoses entity with ``Certificates`` and ``Private keys``.

Reviewer 4: thoses entity -> those entities

> All the exchanges, redirections between the browser, the Service Provider and the Identity Provider could be represented with the schema below

Reviewer 4: represented as follows

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All the exchanges, redirections between the browser, the Service Provider and the Identity Provider could be represented as follows
```

.. image:: https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/en/0/04/Saml2-browser-sso-redirect-post.png

Setting up the Identity Provider (IdP)
--------------------------------------

Using Docker
^^^^^^^^^^^^

We provide an already configured IdP server image in the ``docker-compose.yml`` file, named ``sso-idp-server``.

> The following information are here if you want to tweak something, if not, go directly to the `Setting up the Service Provider (SP)` section.

Reviewer 4: is here

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following information is here if you want to tweak something, if not, go directly to the `Setting up the Service Provider (SP)` section.
```

This container will expose the ``8081`` port, you can override this value in the ``.env`` file.

> You can access the IDP administration page at the following url: http://localhost:8081/simplesaml .

Reviewer: IDP --> IdP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can access the IdP administration page at the following url: http://localhost:8081/simplesaml .
```

> You can access the IDP administration page at the following url: http://localhost:8081/simplesaml .

Reviewer 4: IdP (everywhere)

> | Some users are already configured, the same that are in the `icecat_demo_dev fixtures <https://github.com/akeneo/pim-community-dev/blob/master/src/Akeneo/Platform/Bundle/InstallerBundle/Resources/fixtures/icecat_demo_dev/users.csv>`_.

Reviewer 4: Not sure it's a good idea to point to the master branch :/

Author: yep, have to be updated when the 3.0 will be created.

| They are defined in the ``docker/sso_authsources.php``.

> The configuration of the Service Provider is automatically provided by environment variables in the `docker-compose.yml file <https://github.com/akeneo/pim-enterprise-dev/blob/master/docker-compose.yml#L93>`_

Reviewer 4: idem

Author: idem

Without Docker
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> You can install an IdP server or use any SAAS service (Azure AD for example) that respect the ``SAMLv2`` protocol.

Reviewer: SAAS --> SaaS

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can install an IdP server or use any SaaS service (Azure AD for example) that respect the ``SAMLv2`` protocol.
```

> The configuration of the IdP depends on the solution you choose so you'll have to refer its documentation.

Reviewer: to refer its documentation --> to refer to its documentation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The configuration of the IdP depends on the solution you choose so you'll have to refer to its documentation.
```

> The configuration of the IdP depends on the solution you choose so you'll have to refer its documentation.

Reviewer 4: refer to

You will have to configure the users:

* Add the users you'll want to be able to login into the pim (the user must exists in the pim).
* The attribute ``akeneo_uid`` will have to be sent in the Authentication response, and the value will have to match an existing pim user ``username`` attribute.

You will have to configure the Service Provider information with the following data:

> * EntityId: http://localhost:8080/saml/metadata

Reviewer 4: `localhost:8080` is for docker install no ?

Author: :+1:

* Logout url: http://localhost:8080/saml/logout
* ACS url: http://localhost:8080/saml/acs

> You will have to retrieve the IDP certificate, it will be needed to configure the Service Provider on the Akeneo PIM side.

Reviewer: IDP --> IdP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You will have to retrieve the IdP certificate, it will be needed to configure the Service Provider on the Akeneo PIM side.
```

Setting up the Service Provider (SP)
------------------------------------

* Go to the `sso configuration page`, under ``System/SAML-based Single Sign-On``
* Enable the feature using the "SSO Enable" toggle button
* Fill the form with the values provided by your IdP server
* Then click the Save button

> * If everything went fine, you'll be logged out and redirected to the IDP login form

Reviewer: IDP --> IdP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* If everything went fine, you'll be logged out and redirected to the IdP login form
```

> For the IDP provided in the docker-compose.yml

Reviewer: IDP --> IdP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For the IdP provided in the docker-compose.yml
```

* Certificate: ``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``

FAQ
---

> What if i've wrongly configured my admin user, i can't access to the PIM anymore ?

Reviewer: I've
I can't

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What if I've wrongly configured my admin user, I can't access to the PIM anymore ?
```

> What if i've wrongly configured my admin user, i can't access to the PIM anymore ?

Reviewer 4: I (capital letter)

Reviewer 4: , -> and

Reviewer 4: "access the PIM" is ok

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

An original login form is here as a fallback in this situation, you can access it here: http://your.akeneo-pim.url/user/login

> How can i debug authentication errors ?

Reviewer: I debug

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
How can I debug authentication errors ?
```

> How can i debug authentication errors ?

Reviewer 4: I

^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Various errors can happen, those errors could be due to incorrect configuration on IdP side or SP side.

> Regarding the SP, on the sso configuration page, you have a "download logs" that will provide a ZIP of ``var/logs/authentication*.log`` or check thoses logs manually via the CLI.

Reviewer 4: "download logs" button

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regarding the SP, on the SSO configuration page, you have a "download logs" button that will provide a ZIP of ``var/logs/authentication*.log`` or check thoses logs manually via the CLI.
```

> Regarding the SP, on the sso configuration page, you have a "download logs" that will provide a ZIP of ``var/logs/authentication*.log`` or check thoses logs manually via the CLI.

Reviewer 4: SSO

> Regarding the SP, on the sso configuration page, you have a "download logs" that will provide a ZIP of ``var/logs/authentication*.log`` or check thoses logs manually via the CLI.

Reviewer 4: Splitting the sentence in two is more readable imo : "You can also check these logs via CLI if you PIM installation is on premise or on PaaS"

> Regarding the IDP:

Reviewer: IDP --> IdP

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Regarding the IdP:
```
